python3 - << 'PYEOF'
path = "app/en/insights/articles.ts"
with open(path, "r", encoding="utf-8") as f:
    s = f.read()

anchor = "export const INSIGHTS: readonly InsightArticle[] = ["
assert s.count(anchor) == 1, "anchor not found or not unique"

new_entry = '''  {
    slug: "ex-credit-suisse-banker-not-the-loyal-one",
    title: "The Ex-Credit Suisse Banker Who Hasn't Moved Yet Is Not the Loyal One",
    seoTitle: "Why the Ex-Credit Suisse Banker Hasn't Left UBS Yet",
    seoDescription: "Three years after the rescue, UBS attrition is running below its historic norm. The real reasons ex-Credit Suisse bankers haven't moved, and why the window to move is better now than it was in 2023.",
    linkedinUrl: "",
    date: "2026-07-02",
    summary: "UBS's voluntary attrition rate has fallen below its historic norm even as thousands of ex-Credit Suisse bankers absorbed a takeover their own chairman said would run through a culture filter. The real reasons they haven't moved, and why the window to move is better now than in 2023.",
    pillar: "P1",
    subTheme: "M&ARestructuring",
    markets: ["CH"],
    keywords: ["UBS Credit Suisse integration", "ex-Credit Suisse bankers UBS", "private banking talent Switzerland", "Swiss private banker mobility", "UBS attrition 2026", "AUM portability"],
    body: `Three years after the rescue, the ex-Credit Suisse banker still sitting at UBS is usually not the one who made peace with the merger. He is the one who never tested whether he could leave.

That distinction matters, because it inverts the story most people tell about this integration. The obvious narrative is culture clash: stricter compliance, a different mentality, colleagues who resent the takeover. All of that is real. But the data tells a stranger story. UBS's own voluntary attrition rate, historically close to seven percent a year, fell below that norm even as thousands of Credit Suisse staff absorbed the shock of losing their bank overnight. People are not leaving less because they are happier. They are leaving less because three years of integration turmoil has a way of freezing decision-making rather than forcing it.

I sit across from these bankers regularly, and the pattern is consistent. It is rarely one grievance. It is three, layered on top of each other, and each one reinforces the other two.

The mentality gap is not folklore, UBS built it on purpose. Credit Suisse and UBS were never culturally interchangeable, whatever the merger press releases implied, and UBS never pretended otherwise. Chairman Colm Kelleher said openly, before the deal even closed, that Credit Suisse staff would be run through what he called a culture filter, to make sure UBS did not import something into its ecosystem that caused issues. That was not integration marketing softened for public consumption. It described a deliberate, structural choice to impose UBS's more conservative approach on the acquired side rather than blend the two. Two years into the integration, Ermotti reaffirmed the same commitment in an open letter to staff, promising the bank would never compromise on UBS's strong culture, conservative risk approach or quality service. Academic analysis of the deal's terms confirms what that meant in practice for former CS bankers on the ground, explicit restrictions on acquiring new clients from high-risk jurisdictions and on offering certain complex financial products, categories that CS relationship managers had operated in freely before the takeover.

None of that makes UBS wrong to have done it. A tighter risk culture is exactly what a bank absorbing a scandal-prone rival should build. But it does mean the mentality gap ex-CS bankers describe, less autonomy, slower approval chains, a felt sense of being watched more closely than colleagues on the UBS side, is not folklore or wounded pride. It was designed in, on the record, from the first week.

UBS has been transparent that role reductions would happen gradually through natural attrition, early retirement, and internal reallocation rather than a single sharp cut. That is sound crisis management. It is also, for the individual banker, a slow-motion uncertainty that never quite resolves. The most recent wave, several hundred roles eliminated across Europe, the Middle East and Africa in May, still touched client-facing bankers alongside support functions. Nobody currently inside the machine has a clean signal of whether they are safe, and safety is not the same thing as belonging.

The compensation story is quieter, and more corrosive. Nobody at UBS is being paid badly in absolute terms. That is not the complaint. The complaint, when ex-CS bankers speak candidly, is relative: two-thirds of open positions in Switzerland were filled internally last year, which sounds like loyalty being rewarded until you notice what it actually does to a compensation structure. Internal promotion at scale suppresses the market-testing that normally forces a bank to pay up for external competition. A banker who was competitive on a CS grid in 2022 is not automatically competitive on a UBS grid in 2026, and there has been limited external pressure inside the institution to force that reconciliation. Swiss bank salary surveys for the period point to modest, inflation-adjusted increases across the sector, nothing close to the kind of retention premium that would offset three years of integration fatigue.

There is also a governance backdrop that lands badly with rank-and-file staff even when it does not touch their own paycheck directly. Executive pay at the major Swiss banks reached record levels in 2025, prompting an unusually public rebuke from the Ethos Foundation, the pension-fund-backed governance body that flagged UBS's own CEO compensation as roughly 147 percent above the median of comparable European bank chiefs. A banker does not need to begrudge his CEO's package to notice the contrast between headline executive pay and a flat internal grid. The optics compound the arithmetic.

The bankers who benchmark themselves against the outside market, rather than against their own prior comp, are the ones who come to me. The ones who don't benchmark are the ones still inside, assuming their package is fine because nobody told them otherwise.

The hardest blues to treat are the ones tied to decades of sunk identity. A banker who spent eighteen or twenty years building a book, a reputation, and an identity inside Credit Suisse does not experience a change of employer the way a five-year associate does. The institution was not just where they worked, it was the frame their clients, their family, and often their own sense of professional worth were built around. Watching it disappear, and then being asked to rebuild that same sense of belonging inside the acquirer whose chairman said publicly he was filtering out their culture, is a different kind of loss than a bad bonus year.

That is why the hesitation is not irrational. It is loss aversion operating exactly as behavioural economics predicts, weighted heavily toward the status quo even when the status quo is demonstrably worse than the alternative. The banker stays not because staying is optimal, but because leaving requires actively pricing an uncertain future against a known, if uncomfortable, present. Nobody does that pricing exercise alone very well, and most compliance-trained private bankers are, by training and temperament, more comfortable managing other people's risk than their own.

It is worth being precise about what happened last time, because it is easy to overstate. In the year following the rescue, competitor Swiss private banks moved aggressively on CS talent. EFG International hired roughly 130 client relationship officers in the first ten months of 2023 alone, with about a third of that intake coming from Credit Suisse, and full-year 2023 numbers ultimately reached around 156 new hires. Julius Baer, Lombard Odier and UBP all pulled entire teams out of Credit Suisse's European operations in the same window. That was a genuine, well-documented first wave, and it happened almost entirely in 2023.

It would be dishonest to claim competitor banks are still hiring at that same visible pace three years on. The loudest and most reported departures were front-loaded into the first twelve to eighteen months after the deal closed, and the market has since moved to a quieter, less headline-driven pattern of individual and small-team moves. What that 2023 wave does prove, durably, is that the market has the appetite and the onboarding capability to absorb this exact profile of banker at scale, without the transition failing. That capability has not gone away. If anything, the banks that built out CS-specific onboarding playbooks in 2023 are better at it now, not worse, because they have three years of practice integrating exactly this kind of hire.

Here is the part most of these bankers get wrong. They assume the moment to move was 2023, when the deal closed and the visible hiring wave was underway, and that the window is now shut because the wave has passed. That reasoning conflates two different things, how visible the market is, and how favourable the conditions for an individual move actually are.

The operational case for waiting has largely expired. Client migration onto UBS systems only completed for Swiss clients at the end of March this year, and the bank itself describes the broader integration as still running through the end of 2026. That means the disruption that made 2023 and 2024 a genuinely awkward time to try to port a book, half-migrated systems, unclear client ownership, frozen internal transfers, is now largely resolved. A banker moving today is moving a book that sits on stable infrastructure, not one caught mid-migration. The retention packages that made staying financially rational in year one have mostly run their course by year three. And the institutional excuse for staying, let's see how the integration settles, has run out of runway. It has settled. That is the finding, and it holds regardless of whether this month's hiring headlines are as loud as 2023's.

This is where most recruiter commentary stops, with a diagnosis and no mechanism. We built our internal tools specifically because diagnosis was never the hard part for this population, quantifying the decision was. The EP Portability Score exists because the first question every hesitant CS-legacy banker asks is not will I be happier elsewhere, it is how much of my book actually survives the move. That is a mechanical, answerable question, not an emotional one, and running it removes the single biggest source of paralysis before any conversation about culture or comp even starts.

The EP AUM Portability and Business Case Assessment goes one step further and builds the actual economics, what a realistic transition scenario looks like in revenue terms over the first eighteen months, modelled against staying inside a compensation structure that internal promotion has quietly flattened. And for the bankers who are further along and want to see how a specific business plan holds up under scrutiny before they present it to a hiring bank, the BP Simulator stress-tests exactly that, the same rigour a hiring committee will apply, run privately first.

All three tools run before any bank name is on the table, precisely because the bankers who need them most are the ones who cannot yet admit to themselves that they are considering a move. Turning the decision into a spreadsheet, before it becomes a conversation, is usually what breaks the paralysis.

The blues are real. Three separate ones, in fact, stacked on top of each other. But the two that get talked about, culture and comp, are not actually what is keeping most of these bankers in place. The third one, decades of identity built around an institution that no longer exists, is doing most of the work. And that one only gets resolved by turning an emotional decision into a mechanical one long enough to see it clearly.`,
  },
'''

s = s.replace(anchor, anchor + "\n" + new_entry, 1)

with open(path, "w", encoding="utf-8") as f:
    f.write(s)

print("inserted")
PYEOF
